WIP:  React Week 1 - Hooks (#731)
Ada-Developers-Academy/textbook-curriculum: React/state.md

# Managing data using `state`

> # TODO - Update for `useState` Hook

Reviewer: Is this TODO done now or is there still more to do?

## Learning Goals

- Examine how React allows components to manage data
- Use `state` within a component
- Examine how `props` and `state` affect component rendering

## `state`

State is managed **within a given component**. State can be accessed using the `useState` hook and it can be modified using the a function that `useState` returns.

> **Wait what's a hook?**  A hook is a special function react provides to "hook" into the lifecyle of a React component and access specific functionality.  The `useState` hook function allows us to have a variable, like an instance variable for a Ruby class for our component.  It also provides a function to change the value of that variable, or it's state.  When this state variable is changed, the component is re-rendered.  React has a number of hooks, and you can even create your own, but for now, we will focus on `useState`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Wait what's a hook?**  A hook is a special function react provides to "hook" into the lifecyle of a React component and access specific functionality.  The `useState` hook function allows us to have a variable with scope beyond the execution of a function. In Ruby, an instance variable served this same purpose.  It also provides a function to change the value of that variable (i.e. it's state).  When this state variable is changed, the component is re-rendered.  React has a number of hooks, and you can even create your own, but for now, we will focus on `useState`.
```

Reviewer: This is my attempt to expand on the comparison to instance variables a little. But feel free to ignore if you don't feel it's more clear.

> `useState` allows us to have components with data they remember internally and change over time, like instance variables in a Ruby object.

Reviewer: Oh, this helps a whole lot to provide succinct clarity anyway.

#### useState Overview

- will take the initial value of the state object as a parameter
- will return an array with two elements
  - the current value of the state
  - a function to change the state

## Adding State to the Student Component

> Lets say we want each student component to keep track of if the student is present or absent and we want to be able to change that value if they are present and re-render the component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lets say we want each student component to keep track of whether the student is present or absent and we want to be able to change that value if they are present and re-render the component.
```

### Importing useState

We start by importing the `useState` function.  

```javascript
// src/components/Student.js
import React, { useState } from 'react';
```

**Why do we have { } around `useState`**?

We could call `useState` with `React.useState`, but JavaScript provides a feature called _destructuring_, which we will cover in depth later, which allows us to reference `React.useState` with a variable `useState`, to save typing.

### Calling useState

We can then call `useState` in our Student component.

```javascript
// src/components/Student.js
// ...
const Student = (props) => {

>   const [present, setPresent] = useState(false);

Reviewer: Would isPresent be more clear here? Maybe that's just the convention I'm used to in Java.
```suggestion
  const [isPresent, setIsPresent] = useState(false);
```

Author: I was just thinking the student being present or absent, rather than making it two words.

  // ...
```

When we called `useState` above we passed in the initial value of the state.  In this example we are defaulting students to being not present (absent).

> `useState` returns an array.  We could have written the above as `const presentArray = useState(false)` and then `presentArray[0]` would the the value and `presentArray[1]` would be a function to change the state, but again we are using a feature called destructuring to break that array into two variables `present` and `setPresent`.  This is a common technique when using hooks in React.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`useState` returns an array.  We could have written the above as `const presentArray = useState(false)` and then `presentArray[0]` would the the value and `presentArray[1]` would be a function we can use to change the state.
Instead, we are using a feature called destructuring (like we did with the import above) to break that array into two variables `present` and `setPresent`.  This is a common technique when using hooks in React.
```

      <ul>
        <li>Class: C13</li>
        <li>Birthday: {props.birthday}</li>
        <li>Email: {props.email}</li>
      </ul>
      <button>
        Mark {present ? 'Absent' : 'Present'}
      </button>
    </div>
  );
};
```

Now the component renders with a button that displays "Mark" and either present or absent depending on the current value of `present`.  Try changing the default value of `present` and see the change in the browser.

## Rules with Hooks

There are a few rules to keep in mind with hooks like `useState`.

### 1.  You must call hooks from the top-level of a component.

This means that you cannot put `useState` in a loop like this:

```javascript
  let i = 0;
  // Big NO NO!
  studentList.forEach((student) => {
    [counter, setCounter] = useState(i);  // will generate an error
    i += 1;
  });
```

**Why?**

React depends on the hook functions being called in a specific order when a functional component is run.  It will not allow you to put code into your component which could affect the order in which `useState` is called.  You cannot even put `useState` inside an if statement.

### 2.  You can only call hooks in functional components or other hooks

> Creating your own hooks is a more advanced topic, but state is intended to provide a way for a component to have information it remembers and changes internally over time.  So it does not make sense for state to be used outside of a component.  Therefore only call `useState` inside a React component.  Later if you create your own hooks, you can call them there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
State is intended to provide a way for a component to have information it remembers and changes internally over time, so it does not make sense for state to be used outside of a component.  Therefore only call `useState` inside a React component.  Later if you create your own hooks, you can call them there. But that's a topic we don't need to know about right now.
```
I found it confusing to start by addressing creating your own hooks, so I wanted to suggest removing that bit from the beginning of this line.

## Getting initial values from props

You can use props to set an initial value for the state of a component.  For example we can add a `present` field in `App.js` to give an initial attendance value for a Student.

```javascript
// src/App.js
// ...
const students = [
  {
    fullName: "Ada Lovelace",
    email: "ada@lovelace.uk",
    present: true,
  },
  {
    fullName: "Katherine Johnson",
    email: "kat@nasa.gov",
    present: false,
  },
];
// ...
```

Then in `StudentCollection` we can pass that initial value in as a prop.

```javascript
// src/components/StudentCollection.js
// ...
        <Student
          fullName={student.fullName}
          email={student.email}
          present={student.present}
        />
// ...
```

Then in our `Student` component we can change `useState(false)` and replace it with:

```javascript
// src/components/Student.js
// ...

>   const [present, setPresent] = useState(props.present);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  const [isPresent, setIsPresent] = useState(props.present);
```
Only need this change if we change the one above.
